# HAR.Project

==================================================================
Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project
==================================================================
Student: Luis E. Urbina;
Professors: by Jeff Leek, PhD, Roger D. Peng, PhD, Brian Caffo, PhD;
Course: Getting and Cleaning Data; 
Johns Hopkins University;
February, 2015.

The given data set
==================================================================
It is given the HUMAN ACTIVITY RECOGNITION USING SMARTPHONES DATA
SET, experiment carried out with a group of 30 volunteers which are
randomly partitioned into two groups: 70% for training and 30% for 
test. Each person, wearing a smartphone, performs six different 
activities . Device sensors as accelerometer and gyroscope are 
generating data which are grouped, after digital filtering, in 
variables named features. Detailed information about the each 
record, given files, and additional notes can be found in the 
README.txt file incluided in the data set. 

How the script is connected and works
==================================================================
1. Merge the training and test sets to create one data set.
==================================================================
a) Read the test, training and subject data sets for x and y into R,
   and determine its dimension. Use the read.csv() and dim() functions.
   Next, the generated variables and their dimensions:

    test.x				[2947 x 561]
  	test.y				[2947 x 1]
  	test.subject		[2947 x 1]
  	training.x 			[7352 x 561]
  	training.y		    [7352 x 1]
  	training.subject	[7352 x 1]	

b) Merge the test.x with the training.x data-frames to create data.x. 
   The same for y and subject to create data.y and data.subject. Use 
   rbind() function. Next, the generated variables and their dimensions:

  	data.x			  	[10299 x 561]
  	data.y			  	[10299 x 1]
  	data.s			  	[10299 x 1]

c) Merge data.x, data.y, and data.s to create one data set using 
   the data.frame() function. The variable y its dimensions:

  	data.set			[10299 x 563]

d) data.s belong to the total number of volunteers. It is confirmed
   by the analysis of data.s, using the unique() function. It means, 
   data.s has 30 unique elements:

	  elements.s		[30 x 1]

e) data.y belong to the total number of activities. It is confirmed
   by the analysis of data.y, using the unique() function; it means,
   data.y has 6 unique elements:

  	elements.y			[6 x 1]

f) data.x belong to the total data generated by the device sensors 
   in their 561 variables. The name of those variables is given in 
   the features file and it will be used to name the columns. 

	  features			[561 x 2]
	  
g) Clean the name of the column names. The column names have some 
   illegal symbols for R, such as "-" and ",". These are been removed
   to legalize the proper variable names for the columns.    

   The features data-frame has a additional index which will be used 
   by selecting the mean and standard-deviation variables.

   After the completion of the one data set (data.set) and the analysis
   of its components, it is ready to name columns and rows in descriptive
   names. 

	  data.set			[10299 x 563]

   The data set "data.set" has 10299 measurement and 563 columns; 
   561 for sensing variables, one for Volunteer, and one for Activity,  

==================================================================
3. Use descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set.
==================================================================
h) Columns names are given in the features.txt. It contains the 561 
   variables names. Extract the column name and add the two names for 
   the Volunter and Activity columns that were added in f) using the 
   append() function. Change the name of the columns using colnames().

i) Rows names for the descriptive activities are given in the 
   activity_labels.txt file. Casting the column Activity as factor, 
   the row activities are named in descriptive way: 
	"WALKING"
	"WALKING_UPSTAIRS"
	"WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS"
	"SITTING"
	"STANDING"
	"LAYING"

==================================================================
2. Extract only the measurements on the Mean and Standard Deviation.
==================================================================	


j) Generate a "index" to extract columns with mean and standard 
   deviation. Use the grepl() function into the features data 
   frame used in f) setting as pattern the words "mean" and "std".
   In features, there are 79 variables belonging to mean and 
   standard desviation:

	  mean.std.colnames	[79 x 2]

k) In the index, consider that two columns have been added for the 
   "Volunteer" and ""Activity" variables. So, index has 81 elements;
   79 belonging to the sensing data, one for Volunteer and one for
   Activity. 
	
  	index				[1 x 81]

l) Subset the data.set to generate a data set only containing the 
   mean and standard deviation measurements. Use the subset() function.
   The subset data containts the original 10299 measurements and the 
   79 sensing variables belonging to the mean and standard deviation
   plus the volunteers and activities columns:

	  ds.mean.sd		[10299 x 81]

   It is not consider variables for the mean of the Magnitude because
   they are not final products; they are used to calculate the Jerk
   signals. It is also not consider the meanFreq. Both group will be 
   eliminated from the column variable names. So, the final data frame 
   containing the the mean and standard deviation only have 51 variables:
   49 variables for the mean and std-deviation measurements, 1 for the 
   Volunteer, and 1 for the Activity variables. 
   
   	  ds.mean.sd		[10299 x 51]


==================================================================
4. Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variables names.
==================================================================

m) The volunteer and activities is appropriately labelled to facilitate
   its understanding for human being and to generate a tidy data in 
   the next step. Knowing that "t" stand for time, and "f" stand for 
   frequency, these change are introduced in the column names. 
   

==================================================================
5. From the data, create a tidy data set.
==================================================================

n) Using the aggregate() function, it is created a tidy data set which 
   contains the average of each variable for each activity and each 
   subject. The tidy data has 180 rows: 30 volunteers per six activities 
   each one. Each row is the average of its measurements. It also 
   contains 51 columns: 49 for the sensing variables (mean and standard
   deviation for time and frequency), one for Volunteer, and one for Activities:

  	tidy			[180 x 51]
	
	#

